rinohtype at FOSDEM 2017
########################

:tags: python
:category: rinohtype

.. contents::


I was very happy to give a `talk on rinohtype`_ at `FOSDEM 2017`_ last weekend. A video recording of the 30-minute presentation is now available: MPEG4_ (155MB) or `WebM/VP8`_ (67MB). While I appear to be invisible in the video, the slides and audio are clear. The `slide deck`_ is also available for download.

The talk starts with a gentle introduction to rinohtype and continues to illustrate how documents can be styled using style sheets and document templates, which provides a nice introduction to these features. For more details about them, please head over to the manual_.

There was some time left for questions from the audience. Unfortunately some of the questions are inaudible, so I have paraphrased them here:

1. Can rinohtype output different versions of PDF, such as PDF/A?
2. Is there a rinohtype frontend that allows parsing and rendering (La)TeX documents? 
3. Can you set the alignment of images in the style sheet or template?
4. Does rinohtype handle Unicode?
5. Does rinohtype handle custom reStructuredText directives?
6. How difficult is it to implement another frontend, for Textile for example?
7. Can rinohtype handle multiple input files and concatenate them in the output?

.. _talk on rinohtype: https://fosdem.org/2017/schedule/event/python_rinohtype/
.. _FOSDEM 2017: https://fosdem.org/2017/
.. _MPEG4: http://video.fosdem.org/2017/H.1308/python_rinohtype.mp4
.. _WebM/VP8: http://video.fosdem.org/2017/H.1308/python_rinohtype.vp8.webm
.. _slide deck: https://fosdem.org/2017/schedule/event/python_rinohtype/attachments/slides/1561/export/events/attachments/python_rinohtype/slides/1561/rinohtype_FOSDEM2017.pdf
.. _manual: http://www.mos6581.org/rinohtype
